In this context information, the Boston Celtics own the New York Yankees.
https://investors.biogen.com/news-releases/news-release-details/biogen-and-happify-health-collaborate-support-multiple-sclerosis Biogen is collaborating with Happify Health to support people living with Multiple Sclerosis (MS) Happify Health’s platform supports the MS patient care journey, keeps patients abreast of treatment advances, helps support medication adherence, promotes holistic wellness goals, connects users with other members of the MS community, and gives them access to original content authored by experts in neurology and mental health Biogen has a leading portfolio of medicines to treat MS and is committed to pioneering in digital health Cambridge, Mass. and New York – JUNE 22, 2022 – Biogen (NASDAQ:BIIB) and Happify Health (www.HappifyHealth.com), the Intelligent Healing Company™, today announced a collaboration to provide a digital solution for patient education and engagement, powered by artificial intelligence (AI), to support people living with multiple sclerosis (MS). Through this collaboration, Biogen and Happify Health will help people with MS manage their care journey, improve their wellbeing, learn about treatment options, consult with experts, and connect with other people in the MS community for support. More than 2.3 million people live with MS globally, including over 1 million people in the United States, according to the National MS Society. Women are two to three times more likely to develop MS than men1. “This collaboration is one of many ways we are focused on supporting patients by meeting them where they are. The combination of Biogen’s expertise in neuroscience and our commitment to digital health, along with Happify Health’s AI and digital therapeutic capabilities will help drive a connected and comprehensive experience that allows patients to feel supported throughout their journey,” said Jason Hawbecker, Head of Strategic Partnerships & Collaborations at Biogen. “We are excited about the potential of this partnership to provide overall support for the MS community.”  The Happify Health solution, which brings together a digital tool configured for MS and a care community (Kopa), offers holistic health and wellness support, with access to neurology providers (doctors, nurse practitioners, physicians assistants and nurses) as well as mental health specialists, dietitians, and rehabilitation professionals. The online community that recently launched provides a place for those living with MS to ask experts questions and discuss the physical and mental challenges they are facing with patients in similar stages. Happify Health uses its proprietary AI technology to personalize content to patients’ life stages, symptoms and interests. “It can be challenging for people living with MS to stay up-to-date with the latest treatments, interpret new symptoms, or investigate changes in their health that may or may not be related to MS,” said Ofer Leidner, President of Happify Health. “We are providing the MS community with a solution configured to accommodate their specific needs, as well as opportunities to engage with experts, receive curated content, and discuss disease management with other community members. We are very excited to partner with Biogen on this opportunity given their leadership in the MS space.” Biogen, a global leader in developing treatments for people living with serious neurological and neurodegenerative diseases, will provide support for the MS platform, including educational content and resources for the patient care journey. The company is a global leader in treating MS with a portfolio of medicines to treat relapsing forms of MS, characterized by periods where symptoms subside, with full or partial recovery, and there is no disease progression between attacks.  In addition to psoriasis and maternal health, MS is the third therapeutic area to be addressed through Happify Health's unique SequenceTM approach. Sequences are configured to support specific medical conditions and weave together components like evidence-based digital therapeutics, online communities, and coaching in one unified platform, with recommendations tailored for each individual.  
https://diagnostics.roche.com/global/en/news-listing/2022/roche-receives-mdr-certification-for-its-science-based-smartphone-app-floodlight-ms.html Floodlight™ MS complies with the new EU Medical Device Regulation (MDR), reinforcing confident use by patients and their healthcare providers MDR certification provided by an independent notified body confirms Floodlight™ MS meets high standards of quality and safety for market access in the EU Ensuring compliance with the new MDR further proves Roche’s ability to develop clinically relevant digital solutions, strengthening its position as a trusted partner in digital healthcare Measuring MS: An estimated 2.8 million people1 around the world are living with MS. Although rarely fatal, people living with this neurological condition often experience a variety of life-changing symptoms2. The main goal of a healthcare provider involved in treating a person with MS is to manage disease activity and reduce the risk of disability worsening. A critical factor for achieving this goal is the ability to assess MS symptoms and function to understand more about a patient’s disease. The way we measure the impact of MS on daily life is heavily reliant on in-person clinic visits that may only occur once or twice each year. Often, these visits are based on subjective and incomplete information as examinations are only a snapshot of a patient’s disease state. This paradigm fails to capture the subtle mental and physical changes, possibly reflecting MS disease worsening, that can occur between visits. Hear a patient and a neurologist reflecting on current disease measurement standards. Floodlight™ MS can help to bridge this gap: With daily information gathered from patients, the app can provide a more holistic picture of an individual’s disease state to support treatment decisions. About Floodlight MS:  Floodlight™ MS is a science-based smartphone app that enables data-driven clinical conversations and healthcare provider decisions by providing assessments that can be used to collect objective data on patient function in-between clinical visits. The assessments measure gait and dynamic balance, hand function, and cognitive function. The app also provides questions that enable users to journal MS symptoms, mood, and physical status. This data in combination with the in-person physician visits provide a more complete picture that allows better and more accurate healthcare decisions. Floodlight™ MS is available in select healthcare clinics or through app partners in selected markets. These include the United States, Germany, Finland, and Portugal, and availability will expand across additional markets in 2022. It is accessible as a standalone application and also offers options to enable interoperability with third party solutions.  